= Chapter 1 Problems =

== 8 ==
The Earth is approximately a sphere of radius $6.37 \times 10^6\:\mathrm{m}$.
Calculate the distance from the pole to the equator, measured along the surface of the Earth.

== 10 ==
As seen from the Earth, the Sun has an angular diameter of $0.53°$.
The distance between the Earth and the Sun is $1.5\times10^{11}\:\mathrm{m}$.
From this, calculate the radius of the Sun.

== 20 ==
How many cubic feet are there in a cubic meter?

== 28 ==
The world record for the 100-yard run is 0.9 seconds.
What is the corresponding average speed in km per hour?

== 36 ==
You travel in your car for 30 minutes at 35 km/h, and then for another 30 minutes at 85 km/h.
* (a) What distance do you cover in the first 30 minutes?
  In the second 30 minutes?
* (b) What is your average speed for the entire trip?

== 42 ==
The fastest land animal is the cheetah, which runs at a speed of up to 28 m/s.
The second fastest is the antelope, which runs at a speed of up to 24 m/s.
* (a) Suppose that the cheetah begins to chase the antelope.
  If the antelope has a head start of 50 m, how long does it take the cheetah to catch the antelope?
  How far will the cheetah have traveled by this time?
* (b) The cheetah can only maintain its top speed for about 20 s (and then has to rest,
  whereas the antelope can do it for a considerably longer time.
  What is the maximum head start the cheetah can allow the antelope?

== 62 ==
The driver of an automobile traveling at 95 km/h perceives an obstacle on the road and slams on the brakes.
* (a) Calculate the total stopping distance (in meters).
  Assume that the reaction time of the driver is 0.75 s
  (so there is a time interval of 0.75 s during which the automobile continues at constant speed while the driver gets ready to apply the brakes)
  and that the deceleration of the automobile is $7.8\:\mathrm{m/s^2}$ when the brakes are applied.
* (b) Repeat the calculation of part (a) for initial speeds of 15, 30, 45, 60, and 75 km/h.
  Make a plot of stopping distance vs initial speed.

== 68 ==
Cats are known for their ability to survive falls from buildings several floors high.
If a cat falls three floors down, a distance of 8.7 m, what is its speed when it hits the ground?


= Answers =

== 8 ==
* Radius of the Earth: $r=6.37\times10^6\:\mathrm{m}$
* The circumference of a circle: $C=2 \pi r$

The distance from a pole to the equator is a quarter of the circle going trough the poles and the equator:

{{$
d = \frac{C}{4}
= \pi \frac{r}{2}
= \pi\frac{6.37\times10^6\:\mathrm{m}}{2}
= 1.00 \times 10^7 \: \mathrm{m}
}}$
    Fun fact: The metre was at one point in time defined to be a ten-millionth of the distance between the North Pole and the equator along the meridian through Paris.

== 10 ==
* Angular diameter: $\theta = 0.53°$
* Distance from the Earth to the Sun: $r = 1.5 \times 10^{11} \: \mathrm{m}$

Imagine a circle with the Earth at the center and the Sun at the periphery.
