= Reflection, Refraction and Optics =

== TL;DR ==

*Law of Reflection*
    The angle of incident equals the angle of reflection.

*Index of refraction*
{{$
  v = \frac{c}{n}
}}$

*Law of refraction*
{{$
  \sin{\theta} = n~\sin{\theta^\prime}
}}$

*Critical angle for total internal reflection*
{{$
  \sin{\theta_{\text{crit}}^\prime} = \frac{1}{n}
}}$

== Huygens's Construction ==

    To find the change of position of a wave front in a small time interval $\Delta t$,
    draw many small spheres of radius $[\text{wave speed}] \times \Delta t$
    with centers on the old wave fronts.
    The new wave front is the surface that touches the leading edges of these small spheres.

== Reflection ==

The angle of incidence equals the angle of reflection.

== Refraction ==

{{$
  v = \frac{c}{n}
}}$
Where $n$ is the index of refraction.

The speed of light in the material is slower than the speed of light in a vacuum.

{{$
\begin{align*}
  \lambda f &= v = \frac{c}{n} \\
  \lambda &= \frac{1}{n}\frac{c}{f} \\
  \lambda &= \frac{\lambda_{\text{vac}}}{n}
\end{align*}
}}$

When light penetrates from air into water its speed is reduced by a factor of $n$,
but its *frequency remains constant*.

The color we perceive depends on the frequency of the light reaching our eyes.

{{$
  \sin{\theta} = n~\sin{\theta}
}}$

This change of direction is called refraction,
and this equation is called the law of refraction, or Snell's Law.
The angle $\theta$ is the *angle of incident*,
and $\theta^\prime$ is the *angle of refraction*.
It is usually convenient to measure these angles
between the rays and the normal to the surface.

== Thin Lenses ==

*The lens-makers formula*
{{$
  \frac{1}{f} = (n-1)\left(\frac{1}{R_1}+\frac{1}{R_2}\right)
}}$
where $n$ is the index of refraction of the material of the lens,
$R_1$ and $R_2$ are the radii of the two spherical surfaces making up the lens,
and $f$ is the focal length.
The radii and the focal length are positive for a convex lens,
end negative for a concave lens.

*Lens equation*
{{$
  \frac{1}{s}+\frac{1}{s^\prime} = \frac{1}{f}
}}$

Where $s$ is the object distance, and $s^\prime$ is the object image.

*Magnification*
{{$
  M = -\frac{s^\prime}{s}
}}$

If $M$ is positive, then the image is upright and virtual.
If $M$ is negative, then the image is inverted and real.
