= Contents =
  - [[#Declarative Computation Model|Declarative Computation Model]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store|The single-assignment store]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Declarative Variables|Declarative Variables]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Value store|Value store]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Variable identifiers|Variable identifiers]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Value creation with identifiers|Value creation with identifiers]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Partial values|Partial values]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Variable-variable binding|Variable-variable binding]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#The single-assignment store#Dataflow variables|Dataflow variables]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language|Kernel language]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language#Syntax|Syntax]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language#Values and types|Values and types]]
        - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language#Values and types#Basic types|Basic types]]
        - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language#Values and types#Dynamic typing|Dynamic typing]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language semantics|Kernel language semantics]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language semantics#Basic concepts|Basic concepts]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language semantics#The abstract machine|The abstract machine]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language semantics#Nonsuspendable statements|Nonsuspendable statements]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Kernel language semantics#Suspendable statements|Suspendable statements]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management|Memory Management]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management#Last call optimization|Last call optimization]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management#Memory life cycle|Memory life cycle]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management#Garbage collection|Garbage collection]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management#Garbage collection is not magic|Garbage collection is not magic]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Memory Management#The Mozart garbage collector|The Mozart garbage collector]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#From kernel language to practical language|From kernel language to practical language]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#From kernel language to practical language#Syntactic conveniences|Syntactic conveniences]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#From kernel language to practical language#Functions|Functions]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#From kernel language to practical language#Interactive interface (the declare statement)|Interactive interface (the declare statement)]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Exceptions|Exceptions]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Exceptions#Motivation and basic concepts|Motivation and basic concepts]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Exceptions#The declarative model with exceptions|The declarative model with exceptions]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Exceptions#Full syntax|Full syntax]]
    - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Advanced topics|Advanced topics]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Advanced topics#Functional programming languages|Functional programming languages]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Advanced topics#Unification and entailment|Unification and entailment]]
      - [[#Declarative Computation Model#Advanced topics#Dynamic and static typing|Dynamic and static typing]]

= Declarative Computation Model =

== The single-assignment store ==

The single-assignment store is a set of variables that are initially unbound
and that can be bound to one value.

=== Declarative Variables ===

Variables in the single-assignment store are called *_declarative variables_*.
Once bound, a declarative variable stays bound throughout the computation
and is indistinguishable from its value.

=== Value store ===

A store where all variables are bound to values is called a value store.
That is, a persistent mapping from variables to values.

Why? Here are some reasons:
1. We want to compute with partial values.
2. Declarative concurrency.
3. A single-assignment store is needed for relational (logic) programming
  and constraint programming.

=== Variable identifiers ===

A variable identifier is a textual name that refers to a store entity from outside the store.
The mapping from variable identifiers to store entities is called an *_environment_*.

This is an environment:

$\{\text{X} -> x_1\}$

The identifier X refers to the store variable $x_1$.

=== Value creation with identifiers ===

Once bound, a variable is indistinguishable from its value.
Following the links of bound variables to get the value is called *_dereferencing_*.
It is invisible to the programmer.

=== Partial values ===

A partial value is a data structure that may contain unbound variables.

A declarative variable can be bound to several partial values,
as long as they are compatible with each other.
We say  a set of partial values is compatible
if the unbound variables in them can be bound in such a way as to make them all equal.

=== Variable-variable binding ===

Variables can be bound to variables.

Consider two unbound variables $x_1$ and $x_2$ referred to by the identifiers X and Y.
After doing the bind X=Y the two variables $x_1$ and $x_2$ are equal to each other.
We say that $\{x_1, x_2\}$ form an equivalence set. We also write this as $x_1=x_2$.

=== Dataflow variables ===

In the declarative model, creating a variable and binding it are done separately.
What happens if we try to use the variable before it is bound?
We call this a variable use error.

We have the following possibilities when there is a use error:
1. Execution continues and no error message is given.
  The variable's content is undefined, i.e. it is "garbage": whatever is found in memory.
  This is what C++ does.
2. Execution continues and no error message is given.
  The variable is initialized to a default value when it is declared, e.g., to 0 for an integer.
  This is what Java does for fields in objects and data structures, such as arrays.
  The default value depends on the type.
3. Execution stops with an error message (or an exception is raised).
  This is what Prolog does for arithmetic operations.
4. Execution is not possible because the compiler detects that there is an execution path to the variable's use that does not initialize it.
  This is what Java does for local variables.
5. Execution awaits until the variable is bound then continues.
  This is what Oz does, to support dataflow programming.

Declarative variables that cause the program to wait until they are bound
are called *_dataflow variables_*.
They are tremendously useful in concurrent programming,
i.e., for programs with activities that run independently.

== Kernel language ==

The declarative model defines a simple kernel language.
All programs in the model can be expressed in this language.

=== Syntax ===

The declarative kernel language
| ⟨s⟩ ::=                                                         |                           |
| *skip*                                                          | Empty statement           |
| ⟨s⟩,,1,, ⟨s⟩,,2,,                                               | Statement sequence        |
| *local* ⟨x⟩ *in* ⟨s⟩ *end*                                      | Variable creation         |
| ⟨x⟩,,1,, = ⟨x⟩,,2,,                                             | Variable-variable binding |
| ⟨x⟩ = ⟨v⟩                                                       | Value creation            |
| *if* ⟨x⟩ *then* ⟨s⟩,,1,, *else* ⟨s⟩,,2,, *end*                  | Conditional               |
| *case* ⟨x⟩ *of* ⟨pattern⟩ *then* ⟨s⟩,,1,, *else* ⟨s⟩,,2,, *end* | Pattern matching          |
| { ⟨x⟩ ⟨y⟩,,1,, … ⟨y⟩,,n,, }                                     | Procedure application     |

Where ⟨s⟩ is a statement, ⟨x⟩ and ⟨y⟩ are identifiers, ⟨v⟩ is a value.

Value expressions in the declarative kernel language
| ⟨v⟩                 | ::= | ⟨number⟩ │ ⟨record⟩ │ ⟨procedure⟩                                |
| ⟨number⟩            | ::= | ⟨int⟩ │ ⟨float⟩                                                  |
| ⟨record⟩, ⟨pattern⟩ | ::= | ⟨literal⟩                                                        |
|                     |     | │ ⟨literal⟩(⟨feature⟩,,1,,: ⟨x⟩,,1,, … ⟨feature⟩,,n,,: ⟨x⟩,,n,,) |
| ⟨procedure⟩         | ::= | *proc* { $ ⟨x⟩,,1,, … ⟨x⟩,,n,, } ⟨s⟩ *end*                       |
| ⟨literal⟩           | ::= | ⟨atom⟩ │ ⟨bool⟩                                                  |
| ⟨feature⟩           | ::= | ⟨atom⟩ │ ⟨bool⟩ │ ⟨int⟩                                          |
| ⟨bool⟩              | ::= | *true* │ *false*                                                 |

=== Values and types ===

A type or data type is a set of values together with a set of operations on those values.
A value is "of a type" if it is in the type's set.

==== Basic types ====

The basic types of the declarative model are
numbers (integers and floats),
records (including atoms, booleans, tuples, lists, and strings),
and procedures.

==== Dynamic typing ====

There are two basic approaches to typing, dynamic typing and static typing.
In static typing, all variable types are known at compile time.
In dynamic typing, the variable type is known only when the variable is bound.
The declarative model is dynamically typed.

=== Basic types ===

=== Records an procedures ===

=== Basic Operations ===

== Kernel language semantics ==

The kernel language execution consists in evaluating functions over partial values.

=== Basic concepts ===

==== Variable identifiers and static scoping ====

The program region in which an identifier refers to a particular variable
is called the *_scope_* of the identifier.
Outside the scope, the identifier does not mean the same thing.
The meaning of an identifier is determined by the innermost *local* statement that declares it.
This scoping rule is called lexical scoping or static scoping.

==== Procedures ====

Procedures are one of the most important basic building blocks of any language.
Procedures output results by being passed references to unbound variables,
which are bound inside the procedure.

==== Dynamic scoping versus static scoping ====

* *_Static scope_*. The variable corresponding to an identifier occurrence is the one defined in the textually innermost declaration surrounding the occurrence in the source program.
* *_Dynamic scope_*. The variable corresponding to an identifier occurrence is the one in the most-recent declaration seen during the execution leading up to the current statement.

==== Procedural abstraction ====

1. *Procedural abstraction*. Any statement van be made into a procedure by putting it inside a procedure declaration.
  This is called procedural abstraction.
  We also say that the statement is abstracted into a procedure.
2. *Free identifiers*. A free identifier in a statement is an identifier that is not defined in that statement.
  It might be defined in an enclosing statement.
3. *Static scoping*. A procedure can have external references,
  which are free identifiers in the procedure body that are not declared as argument.
  The value of an external reference is its value when the procedure is defined.
  This is the consequence of static scoping.

=== The abstract machine ===

==== Definitions ====

* A _single-assignment store σ_ is a set of store variables.
  These variables are partitioned into
  (1) sets of variables that are equal but unbound
  (2) variables that are bound to a number, record, or procedure.
  For example, in the store $\{x_1,x_2 = x_3, x_4 = a|x_2\}$
  $x_1$ is unbound,
  $x_2$ and $x_3$ are equal and unbound,
  and $x_4$ is bound to the partial value a|$x_2$.
  A store variable bound to a value is indistinguishable from that value.
  This is why a store variable is sometimes called a store entity.
* An _environment_ $E$ is a mapping from variable identifiers to entities in _σ_.
  We will write $E$ as a set of pairs,
  e.g., $\{\mathtt{X} \rightarrow x, \mathtt{Y} \rightarrow y\}$,
  where $\mathtt{X},\mathtt{Y}$ are identifiers and $x, y$ refer to store entities.
* A _semantic statement_ is a pair (⟨s⟩, $E$)
  where ⟨s⟩ is a statement and $E$ is an environment.
  The semantic statement relates a statement to what it references in the store.
* An _execution state_ is a pair $(ST,\sigma)$
  where $ST$ is a stack of semantic statements and $\sigma$ is a single-assignment store.
* A _computation_ is a sequence of execution states starting from an initial state:
  $(ST_0,\sigma_0) \rightarrow (ST_1,\sigma_1) \rightarrow (ST_2,\sigma_2) \rightarrow \dots$.

A single transition in a computation is called a computation step.
A computation step is atomic, i.e., there are no visible intermediates states.

==== Program execution ====

A program is simply a statement ⟨s⟩.

* The initial execution state is: 
{{{
([(⟨s⟩,∅)],∅)
(
  [
    (⟨s⟩,∅)
  ],
  ∅
)
}}}
  That is, the initial store is empty (no variables, empty set ∅)
  and the initial execution state has just one semantic statement (⟨s⟩,∅) in the stack $ST$.
  The semantic statement contains ⟨s⟩ and an empty environment (∅).
  We use brackets […] to denote the stack.
* At each step, the first element of $ST$ is popped
  and execution proceeds according to the form of the element.
* The final execution state (if there is one) is a state in which the semantic stack is empty.

A semantic stack $ST$ can be in one of the three run-time states:
* Runnable: $ST$ can do a computation step.
* Terminated: $ST$ is empty.
* Suspended: $ST$ is not empty, but cannot do any computation step.

==== Calculating with environments ====

The notation $E$(⟨x⟩) retrieves the entity associated with the identifier ⟨x⟩ from the store.
To define the semantics of the abstract machine instructions,
we need two common operations on environments,
namely _adjunction_ and _restriction_.

_Adjunction_ defines a new environment by adding a mapping to an existing one.

The notation
    $E + \{\langle \mathtt{x} \rangle \rightarrow x\}$
denotes a new environment $E'$ constructed from $E$
by adding the mapping $\{\langle \mathtt{x} \rangle \rightarrow x\}$
This mapping overrides any other mapping from the identifier ⟨x⟩.

_Restriction_ defines a new environment whose domain is a subset of an existing one.

The notation
    $E|_{\{\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_1,\dots,\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_n\}}$
denotes a new environment $E'$ such that
$\mathrm{dom}(E') = \mathrm{dom}(E)\cap\{\langle \mathtt{x} \rangle_1,\dots,\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_n\}$
and $E'(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle) = E(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle)$
for all $\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle \in \mathrm{dom}(E')$.
That is, the new environment does not contain any identifiers other than those mentioned in the set.

=== Nonsuspendable statements ===

==== The `skip` statement ====

The semantic statement is:
{{$
(\mathtt{skip}, E)
}}$

Execution is complete after this pair is popped from the semantic stack.

==== Sequential composition ====

The semantic statement is:
{{$
(\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle_1 \langle\mathtt{s}\rangle_2, E)
}}$

Execution consists of the following actions:
* Push $(\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle_2, E)$ on the stack.
* Push $(\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle_1, E)$ on the stack.

==== Variable declaration (the `local` statement) ====

The semantic statement is:
{{$
(\mathtt{local}\:\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle\:\mathtt{in}\:\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle\:\mathtt{end},E)
}}$

Execution consists of the following actions:
* Create a new variable $x$ in the store.
* Let $E'$ be $E + \{\langle \mathtt{x} \rangle \rightarrow x \}$
* Push $(\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle, E')$ on the stack.

==== Variable-variable binding ====

The semantic statement is:
{{$
(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_1 = \langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_2, E)
}}$

Execution consists of the following action:
* Bind $E(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_1)$ and $E(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle_2)$ in the store.

==== Value creation ====

The semantic statement is:
{{$
(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle = \langle\mathtt{v}\rangle, E)
}}$

where $\langle\mathtt{v}\rangle$ is a partially constructed value
that is either a record, number, or procedure.

Execution consists of the following actions:
* Create a new variable $x$ in the store.
* Construct the value represented by $\langle\mathtt{v}\rangle$ in the store
  and let $x$ refer to it.
  All identifiers in $\langle\mathtt{v}\rangle$ are replaced by their store contents
  as given by $E$.
* Bind $E(\langle\mathtt{x}\rangle)$ and $x$ in the store.

==== Free and bound identifier occurrences ====

Here is an example with both free and bound occurrences:
{{{oz
local A B in
   A=1
   B=2
   Res=A+B
end
}}}
This cannot run. `Res` is a free identifier with respect to the scope.

This can:
{{{oz
local Res in
  local A B in
     A=1
     B=2
     Res=A+B
  end
end
}}}
This can run since it has no free identifier occurrences.

==== Procedure values (closures) ====

{{{oz
proc {LowerBound X ?Z}
   if X>=Y then Z=X else Z=Y end
end
}}}

The `if` statement has three free variables, `X`, `Y`, `Z`.
Two of them, `X` and `Z` are also formal parameters.
The third, `Y`, is not a formal parameter.
It has to be defined by the environment where the procedure is declared.

In general, a procedure expression is written as:
{{$
(\mathtt{proc} \{\:$\:\langle\mathtt{y}\rangle_1\dots\langle\mathtt{y}\rangle_n\}\:\langle\mathtt{s}\rangle\:\mathtt{end},\:CE)
}}$
Here $CE$ (the contextual environment) is $E|_{\{\langle\mathtt{z}\rangle_1,\dots,\langle{z}_n\}$,
where $E$ is the environment when the procedure is declared.

Because it contains an environment as well as a procedure definition,
a procedure value is often called a closure or a lexically scoped closure.

=== Suspendable statements ===

==== Conditional (the `if` statement) ====

==== Procedure application ====

==== Pattern matching (the `case` statement) ====

== Memory Management ==

=== Last call optimization ===

Consider the following procedure:
{{{oz
proc {Loop10 I}
   if I==10 then skip
   else
     {Browse I}
     {Loop10 I+1}
   end
end
}}}
* The initial execution state is:
  {{$
  ([(\{\mathtt{Loop10\:0}\}, E_0)],
  \sigma)
  }}$
  where $E_0$ is the environment at the call and $\sigma$ the initial store.
* After executing the `if` statement, then becomes:
  {{$
  ([(\{\mathtt{Browse\:I}\},\{\mathtt{I} \rightarrow i_0\})\:(\{\mathtt{Loop10\:I+1}\},\{\mathtt{I} \rightarrow i_0\})],
  \{i_0 = 0\} \cup \sigma)
  }}$
* After executing the `Browse`, we get to the first recursive call:
  {{$
  ([(\{\mathtt{Loop10\:I+1}\},\{\mathtt{I} \rightarrow i_0\})],
  \{i_0 = 0\} \cup \sigma)
  }}$
* After executing the `if` statement in the recursive call, this becomes:
  {{$
  ([(\{\mathtt{Browse\:I}\},\{\mathtt{I} \rightarrow i_1\})\:(\{\mathtt{Loop10\:I+1}\},\{\mathtt{I} \rightarrow i_1\})],
  \{i_0 = 0,i_1 = 1\} \cup \sigma)
  }}$

=== Memory life cycle ===

=== Garbage collection ===

=== Garbage collection is not magic ===

=== The Mozart garbage collector ===

== From kernel language to practical language ==

=== Syntactic conveniences ===

=== Functions ===

=== Interactive interface (the declare statement) ===

== Exceptions ==

=== Motivation and basic concepts ===

=== The declarative model with exceptions ===

=== Full syntax ===

== Advanced topics ==

=== Functional programming languages ===

=== Unification and entailment ===

=== Dynamic and static typing ===

