= Specifying a Programming Language =
Syntax vs. Semantics

Syntax
:: Definition of the *form* of programs in a language.
:: Specifies which sequences of symbols are *valid* (are programs), and which are not.

Semantics
:: Definition of the *meaning* of programs in a language.
:: Specifies what the computer has to *do* during an execution of a program.

== Formal Languages ==

A *formal language* $\mathcal{L}$ is as set of strings (sequences) of symbols from a finite alphabet $\mathcal{A}$:
:: $\mathcal{A} = \{s_1, s_2,\dots,s_n\}$
:: $\mathcal{L} = \{s^{(1)} s^{(2)} \dots s^{(m)} \: | \:  m \geqslant 0, s^{(i)} \in \mathcal{A} \}$

== Formal Grammars ==

A formal grammar $\Gamma$ is a 4-tuple $(\mathcal{V,S,R,v_s})$, where:
:: $\mathcal{V} = \{v_1,v_2,\dots,v_{n_v}\}$ is a finite set of variables (non-terminals)
:: $\mathcal{S} = \{s_1,s_2,\dots,s_{n_s}\}$ is a finite set of symbols (terminals)
:: $\mathcal{R} = \{(v,t^{ (1) }t^{ (2) } \dots t^{ (m) })| v \in \mathcal{V}, m \geqslant 0, t^{(i)} \in \mathcal{V} \cup \mathcal{S} \}$ is a finite set of rules (productions)
:: $v_s \in \mathcal{V}$ is the start variable (root, top)

== Backus-Naur Form ==

Terminals are distinguished from non-terminals by some typographical convention, for example:
:: non-terminals are written in _italics_, using angle brackets etc.;
:: terminals are written in a monotype font, enclosed in quotation marks, etc.
Rules are written as strings which contain: ::
:: a non-terminal,
:: a special symbol (typically, $::=$),
:: a sequence of terminals an non-terminals, or the symbol $\epsilon$

The Backus-Naur form for a grammar that produces signed integers is:
:: $\langle signed\:integer \rangle ::= \langle sign \rangle\langle integer \rangle$
:: $\langle sign \rangle ::= +\,|\,-$
:: $\langle integer \rangle ::= \langle digit \rangle | \langle digit \rangle\langle integer \rangle$
:: $\langle digit \rangle ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9$

== Classification of Grammars ==

=== Regular Languages ===
In a *Regular grammar*, all rules are of one of the forms:
:: $ \mathcal{v} ::= \mathcal{s}\;\mathcal{w} $
:: $ v ::= s $
:: $ v ::= \epsilon $

where $\mathcal{v, w}$ are any variables in $\mathcal{V}$ and $\mathcal{s}$ is
any symbol $\mathcal{S}$.

=== Context-free Languages ===
In a context-free grammar, all rules are of the form:
:: $\mathcal{v ::= \gamma}$

where $\mathcal{v}$ is a variable in $\mathcal{V}$ and $\gamma$ is any sequence
of variables and symbols from $\mathcal{V} \cup \mathcal{S}$.

Recursive regular expressions.

=== Context-sensitive Languages ===
In a context-sensitive grammar, all rules are of the form:
:: $\alpha \mathcal{v} \beta ::= \alpha \gamma \beta$

where $\mathcal{v}$ is any variable from $\mathcal{V}$
and $\alpha,\beta,\gamma$ are
any sequences of variables and symbols from $\mathcal{V} \cup \mathcal{S}$.

=== Recursively Enumerable (Unrestricted) Languages ===
In a unrestricted grammar, all rules are of the form:
:: $\alpha ::= \beta$

where $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are 
any sequences of variables and symbols from $\mathcal{V} \cup \mathcal{S}$
($\alpha$ is non-empty).

== Why do we care? ==
* Different grammars have different computational complexity:
  unrestricted ≻ context-sensitive ≻ context-free ≻ regular
* Regular grammars are used to define the lexemes of a programming
  language, i.e., sequences of symbols from the alphabet of individual
  characters.
* Context-free grammars are used to define programs, i.e., sequences of
  symbols from the alphabet of individual lexemes in a programming
  language.
* Additional constraints may be needed to further define the language,
  e.g., by specifying that variable identifiers can be used only after they
  have been declared, etc.
