= Problems =
* [X] 1 ER
* [X] 2 ER
* [X] 3 Relajsonsalgebra
* [X] 4 SQL SELECT
* [X] 5 SQL SELECT
* [X] 6 SQL INSERT
* [X] 7 Normalisering 2NF/3NF
* [X] 8 
* [X] 9
* [X] 10 4NF
* [X] 11 Extendible Hash
* [X] 12 B+-Tree
* [X] 13 Query processing
* [ ] 14 Isolasjonsnivå?
* [X] 15 Two Phase Locking
* [X] 16 ARIES
* [ ] 17 ARIES

= Problem 1 =

Each submitted paper gets a:
* type:  e.g. “ordinary paper”, “short paper” and “poster”.
* unique identifier
* title
* PDF file
* type of paper.

Author(s):
* Name
* email address to each author

In order to evaluate the quality of the submitted papers,
a program committee is formed with
recognized researchers from the research community.
Members of the program committee are registered with a
* unique number
* name
* affiliation (University, Research organization, …)
* email address

Every paper is allocated to three members of the program committee.

Each of these three program committee members is responsible for an independent review of the paper.

A program committee member doesn’t necessarily perform the review of every paper herself.

If another person does the review of a paper, this person’s name has to be registered.

Each paper is evaluated in the
categories:
”originality”, ”significance”, ”technical quality”, ”relevance”, ”presentation” and ”overall rating”.

For each category there exists:
* a text that describes the category.
In each category, the paper gets
* a rating from 1 ("Strong reject") to 7 ("strong accept") from each reviewer.

In addition, the reviewer can write
* a comment to the authors and
* a (secret) comment to the program committee.

For each paper the reviewer has to state her competence (low/medium/high) in the specific topic covered by the paper.

Each reviewer states the amount of rewriting (no/some/much) that she considers necessary before the paper can be accepted.

When all papers have been evaluated, the program committee members meet and choose the papers that will be presented at the conference.

The chosen papers changes status to "accepted", while the remaining papers become "rejected" papers.

Finally, the decisions are sent to the authors by email together with copies of the reviews.

== Solution ==

ProgCommMember:
No e-mail
Nationality?

ReviewCategory:

= Problem 2 =
== Solution ==
A(a-1, a-3, a-4)
C(b-1, a-1)
C2(b-1, b-2)
D(b-1, a-1)
D2(b-1, b-2)

E(e-1, e-2, e-3)
S(s-1, e-1, b-1)
