= Contents =
    - [[#The Application Layer|The Application Layer]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#Principles of Network Applications|Principles of Network Applications]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#The Web and HTTP|The Web and HTTP]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#Electronic Mail in the Internet|Electronic Mail in the Internet]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service|DNS The Internet's Directory Service]]
            - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#Services Provided by DNS|Services Provided by DNS]]
            - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#Overview of How DNS Works|Overview of How DNS Works]]
                - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#Overview of How DNS Works#A Distributed, Hierarchical Database|A Distributed, Hierarchical Database]]
                - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#Overview of How DNS Works#DNS Caching|DNS Caching]]
            - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#DNS Records and Messages|DNS Records and Messages]]
                - [[#The Application Layer#DNS The Internet's Directory Service#DNS Records and Messages#DNS Messages|DNS Messages]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#Video Streaming and Content Distribution Networks|Video Streaming and Content Distribution Networks]]
        - [[#The Application Layer#Socket Programming: Creating Network Applications|Socket Programming: Creating Network Applications]]

= The Application Layer =

== Principles of Network Applications ==

== The Web and HTTP ==

== Electronic Mail in the Internet ==

== DNS The Internet's Directory Service ==
*Hostname*

=== Services Provided by DNS ===
The Internet's *Domain name system (DNS)* is:
* A distributed database
* An application-layer protocol that allows hosts to query said database.

Primary function: Translate hostnames to IP addresses.
*DNS Servers* are typically UNIX machines running the Berkeley Internet Name Domain (BIND) software.
The DNS protocol runs over UDP and uses port 53.

DNS provides a few other important services:
* *Host Aliasing*
    - The real name is called the canonical name.
* *Mail Server Aliasing*
* *Load distribution*

The DNS is specified in RFC 1034 and RFC 1035, and updated in several additional RFCs.

=== Overview of How DNS Works ===

Problems with a centralized design include:
* *A single point of failure*
* *Traffic volume*
* *Distant centralized database*
* *Maintenance*

In summary a centralized database simply does not scale.

==== A Distributed, Hierarchical Database ====
No single DNS server has all the mappings for all the hosts in the Internet.

Approximate Hierarchy:
* root DNS servers
    - provides the IP addresses of TLD DNS servers
* top-level domain (TLD) DNS servers
    - For each com, org, net, edu etc. there is a DNS server (or server cluster)
* authoritative DNS servers
    - Maintained by organizations with hosts
    - Can also be outsourced

*Local DNS servers* (aka default name servers)

==== DNS Caching ====
It is just what is sounds like.
Improves delay performance and reduces the number of DNS messages sent through the Internet.

=== DNS Records and Messages ===
*Resource records (RRs)*:
`(Name, Value, Type, TTL)`

`TTL`: Time to live. Determines when the record should be removed from cache.
The meaning of `Name` and `Value` depend on `Type`:
* If `Type=A`, then `Name` is a hostname and `Value` is the IP address for the hostname.
* If `Type=NS`, then `Name` is a domain and `Value` is the hostname of an authoritative DNS server that knows how to obtain the IP addresses of hosts in the domain.
* If `Type=CNAME`, then `Value` is a canonical hostname for the alias hostname `Name`.
* If `Type=MX`, then `Value` is the canonical name of a mail server that has alias hostname `Name`

==== DNS Messages ====
DNS message format:
| Identification                                  | Flags                    | 12 bytes                                          |
| Number of questions                             | Number of answer RRs     | \/                                                |
| Number of authority RRs                         | Number of additional RRs | \/                                                |
| Questions (Variable number of questions)        | >                        | Name, type fields for a query                     |
| Answers (variable number of RRs)                | >                        | RRs in response to query                          |
| Authority (variable number of RRs               | >                        | Records for authoritative servers                 |
| Additional information (variable number of RRs) | >                        | Additional "helpful" information that may be used |

* The first 12 bytes is the header section:
    * Identification:
        - 16-bit number that identifies the query
        - It is copied into the reply message, allowing the client to match received replies with queries.
    * Flags:
        * 1-bit Query(0)/Reply(1)
        * 1-bit Authoritative
        * 1-bit recursion-desired flag
    * Number-of fields
* Question Section
    - 
* Answer section
* Authority section
* Additional section

== Video Streaming and Content Distribution Networks ==

== Socket Programming: Creating Network Applications ==

